---
layout: page
title: "Unit 4 Introduction"
course: "dlprograms"
unit: 4
---
As a CTO, you'll have the daunting task of building a network that can support thousands of different devices of hundreds of different models (even in the smallest school or district). And it’s not just computers and printers - everything from freezers to air conditioners to cameras to lighting control systems to bus GPS units are connecting to the Internet and school networks. The development (and the enforcement of policy) of procedures around supporting these devices will be a huge commitment, but solid enforcement is the best way to avoid headaches down the road.

CTOs tend to come in two varieties. There are "technically-focused CTOs" who have a background in technology infrastructure but don't have the instructional background to understand technology in context. Conversely, there are "instructionally-focused CTOs" who have a teaching background and are now supervising both instructional technology and IT operations. Some districts have two CTOs or technology directors - this allows specialization, but the lines are grey especially if they’re not in the same reporting chain. In this course, participants are typically instructionally-focused and now have to take on technical responsibilities. It's not necessary for a CTO to understand how the bits flow on a technical level, but you should know “enough to be dangerous” and enough to supervise your technical staff. It’s always advisable to ensure you have one technical lead who you can rely on for the daily management of the technology infrastructure.

With technology ever changing, there's pressure on CTOs to provide the latest, greatest, coolest equipment at all times to every school. Funding aside, CTOs have the challenge of Enterprise-level devices that are used in schools and businesses are never as “cool” as what you can get at home (they always tend to be larger, uglier, and more expensive) and you can never buy them as fast. Dubbed the _Best Buy Effect_, school boards and decision-makers increasingly need to be taught why you can only buy iPads from Apple and not shop around for better bargains or why they can buy a wireless router for their home for $300, but one for a school may cost 2-3 times that amount (spoiler: an enterprise wireless access point has considerably more capacity and Apple retailers are forbidden by their agreement with Apple from selling to schools - only Apple can sell to schools). Some of this conversation will bleed into Unit 6 in our discussion of state master agreements and leasing versus purchasing.

## Setting Standards
Fundamentally, a school's IT program will be judged by three factors: (1) how well someone's desktop PC works; (2) how well the Internet works and (3) Printing. I’ve worked with IT for nearly 20 years, in education and in the private sector. Printing in an enterprise environment never works like it’s supposed to and is always highly problematic to the point where most people expect failure. This is almost always one strike against any IT environment. 

As a CTO, you'll be responsible for purchasing the bulk of the devices in your school.  That doesn’t mean, by any measure, that you’ll be able to purchase everything or that you’ll even be involved in the decision. CTE, Special Education, Title I, and other grant and Federal programs often have their own funds in addition to school funds, PTSA funds, etc.  All of these groups tend to want to purchase equipment on their own and, understandably, don’t want to hear “no”. It's important for CTOs to set equipment standards - which models of desktop/laptop/printer/etc. people can buy regardless of funding source. Without these standards and processes, any department with money can buy whatever they want - and it will be up to you to make it work. A good relationship with your Finance Officer is critical - even if someone chooses to bypass you as the CTO, they can't bypass the finance office. Ideally a finance officer would recognize an IT purchase, and kick it over to the CTO for approval. Some districts even require equipment that is donated by a PTA or procured through Donors Choose to meet district standards. While this means that equipment will almost certainly be more expensive and people may be told “no” more often than they would like, users can be guaranteed that it will work with your software and your infrastructure, and that the IT department has the expertise to support the device. Obviously, it's much easier for an IT department to support one or two of everything than twenty of thirty of everything. 

The number and types of standards your district will have will depend on your use case. Some districts choose not to support Windows devices or Macs or iOS devices. For each different operating system you bring in, there's a new set of management tools and administration that's very different from every other. For each brand of laptop, there's potentially a different power adapter and video adapter that you'll need to keep in stock. Simplifying the computer inventory allows for this simplicity. 

With [USB-C ports][1] becoming increasingly prevalent, it's becoming possible to have a power cord and peripheral adapters that are universal which may simplify peripheral inventory. Many districts are starting to enforce USB-C as a standard for all devices for this reason.

[1]:	https://www.pcmag.com/how-to/what-is-usb-c-an-explainer