---
layout: page
title: "Selecting Computing Devices"
course: "dlprograms"
unit: 4
---
Aside from physical buildings, desktop and laptop computer purchases may be your district's single biggest capital expenditure. Especially in the COVID-19 era, schools are pouring millions of dollars into purchasing new devices. A misstep can derail your entire digital learning initiative. The task of selecting computers is daunting as there are seemingly limitless options. While there were once only two options (Windows and Mac), the market has experienced seismic disruption in the last decade with the release of the iPad in 2010 and the Chromebook in 2011. 

* **[Chrome OS][1]**: Chromebooks and Chromeboxes (desktop Chromebooks) were first released in 2011 and are typically low-powered laptop and desktop devices that run Google's Chrome OS operating system.  Chrome OS is limited to running web-based applications and a selection of Android apps. While Chrome-books have some limitations in functionality and performance, their low price point and extensive built-in remote management features make them a very attractive option for schools. Additionally, because of their prevalence, many app makers and developers have optimized their sites to function on a Chromebook. The use of Google Chromebooks does require all students to have access to [Google GSuite for Education][2]. Chromebooks are not suited activities that need significant local compute power (gaming, video and photo editing, complex spreadsheets), and also have limited offline functionality (though this has improved significantly since Chromebooks were originally introduced).  
* **iPad and iOS**: iPods and iPhones are typically not sufficient for classroom use, but iPads have seen wide-scale adoption in education as well. Many school districts like iPads for lower grades (K-2) because the touch-friendly interface is easier for younger students to understand than the Chromebook interface, and there are a wide variety of apps for younger students. The built-in camera and software optimized for movie editing and photography can also be useful for older students. However, while Apple does sell a keyboard case, the keyboard and accessories are all still separate components, creating challenges with physical inventory. Additionally, because these components must be purchased separately, the total purchase cost can be high.
* **Windows Devices**: Windows-based laptops and desktops are the most prevalent computers in the world, and are typically what is found in most corporate environments and homes. Windows-based computers are available in any form factor imaginable from desktop to tablet, and run just about any software package out there. While this is a great advantage of Windows-based systems, the number of different device combinations combined with the challenge of administering, securing, patching, and updating all of these different tools remains a challenge.
* **MacOS Devices**: While Apple was originally a dominating force in education, the influence of the Mac has dwindled in the last two decades. Macs are arguably among the most powerful computers and can also run many of the same applications of their Windows counterparts in addition to some unique features that come from Apple’s “walled garden” approach. However, while Macs tend to have the longest usable life of any of the other device options, they also have the highest purchase cost, which limits the ability of many districts to purchase them. 
* **Android Tablets**: Android tablets have a bit of a checkered past. While Android runs some of the more popular tablets like the Kindle Fire, Android Tablets have never really taken off. They are the cheapest of every device listed, but since many don't have a wide app selection, and also don't feature integrated keyboards, most schools tend to avoid them. 
* **Linux**: Linux is a free, open-source operating system that runs on just about everything ([literally][3]). Despite being free, lean, and fast, the technical burden of setup combined with what is often considered an inferior user experience makes it unrealistic for many districts to implement. 
In reality, many districts use a hybrid of device types. Observationally, the most common combination nowadays is Chromebooks (3-12) and iPads (K-2) for portable devices, and Windows or Mac desktops. However, some districts are all-in on Chromebooks and use them for everything outside of CTE classes (which have their own special requirements). 

## Deciding Goals
Before you can decide on the devices selected, it's important to determine the structure of your program. Is 1:1 computing (one laptop per student) the goal? In many districts, it had not been - Wake County Schools had decided on a 1:3 model (one laptop per three students) in order to encourage teamwork and collaboration. Davie County had classroom sets of different types of devices (Chromebooks, Macs, Windows devices, and iPads) in order to allow teachers to select the devices that they needed for the tasks that they were completing.

However in a COVID-19 era, many schools have been forced into a 1:1 model, whether they were ready or interested. Both of these districts are now moving towards 1:1 as quickly as possible, and will likely need to remain there. 

## Selecting Devices
The process of selecting the devices to be used in your school should connect back to your school's vision for Digital-Age Learning. You should purchase the devices that enable you to do what your vision says that you should be doing. For example, if your school has a focus on the digital arts across the curriculum, a Chromebook isn't going to be powerful enough and lacks the tools needed. By contrast, if your school aims to have students writing code or engaging in collaborative activities using digital tools, a Chromebook would probably work quite well. 

The second selection criteria relates to form factor. If you're going to be 1:1, you may only purchase laptops (broadly, including tablets and/or 2-in-1 devices) for your school and that's all. There may be a few places where desktops are required such as kiosks for the cafeteria and library or computer labs. Some staff may get desktop computers on their desks, or you may opt to provide all staff with laptops and docking stations. There is a cultural element to this that you need to consider - in a previous school where I worked, the principal gave everyone a laptop, including the custodians and cafeteria workers (two groups who are usually excluded). The custodian loved technology and became a primary first point-of-contact for students when they wanted to know how to do something on the computer, while the students were able to teach the cafeteria worker how to Skype with her grandkids. This inclusiveness had a significant and measurable impact on the culture of this school. Other schools only give laptops to certified staff members (teachers, counselors, librarians, etc.) and may give desktops to other staff on an as-needed basis for them to do their jobs. 

Once you decide on desktops, you'll also need to purchase monitors. Some schools have been transitioning away from monitors and using larger 4K TVs instead. A 43” 4K TV often costs less than a 27” monitor while providing more screen real estate. But it does look a little strange on your desk. 

For staff devices, you need to decide if they're going to be the same devices as what is being issued to students or different. On one hand, teachers have different uses for their devices than students and may have different requirements for their devices (conversely, schools tend to prefer student devices to be heavier and more durable). However, teachers tend to run into problems with the compatibility or appearance of a tool being different on a student device when operating system is different (i.e. what works one way on their Windows laptop doesn’t work the same on student Chromebooks). Some districts account for this by issuing two devices to a teacher, one for their day-to-day use and one for testing student apps. We do know from the NC IMPACT Evaluation, teachers are much more likely to adopt technology in their classroom if they can experience the device before it's issued to the students. 

Once these decisions are made, it's time to look at the specs of the computer. Since most storage is done in the cloud, hard drive space tends not to be an issue, though a [solid-state drive (SSD)][4] should be utilized since it performs faster and is more durable than traditional spinning-disk drives. SSD-based computers and fanless computers are ideal because the lack of moving parts means that there are fewer components that can break. Glass displays are more expensive than plastic, but also tend to be more durable. For laptops, durability is a critical component. You should work with your vendors to select the best devices and to get demo units for you to inspect. Beyond the specs, a lot of your decision should come down to student and staff input. Perceptual things, like the keyboard and speaker quality, display brightness, weight, etc. should play heavily into purchasing devices that accomplish the district goals, but are also the devices that are preferred by your students and staff. 

## Insurance
Accidents happen. Whether it’s a student dropping their laptop, intentional damage, or an accident with a cup of water - devices will get broken. Your district needs to decide in policy how they want to handle accidental damage to devices. Some districts purchase accidental damage insurance with the devices and families may be on the hook for any applicable deductibles. Some charge families for insurance, or collect a fee to be used to self-insure and pay for repairs from that pool of money. Some districts just eat the cost. There isn't a "right" or "wrong" way, a lot will depend on the culture within your district and the financial situation within your district and community. 

## Asset Tracking
While some schools may use a simple spreadsheet to track who has computers, an asset tracking system and process should be developed to track who has devices, when devices were purchased, repair histories, etc. Many library systems can also track devices. Free, open source technology tools, like [SnipeIT][5] also exist. 

## Mobile Device Management
Given the number of devices that you'll have in your school, putting hands-on each device each time there's an upgrade just isn't feasible. Mobile Device Management (MDM) solutions allow you to remotely manage devices, usually from a web-based console. From this console, you can usually configure everything from security and update settings to which apps are and are not allowed to run on the device. You can also remotely install, update, and remove apps on a device.

Google's [Chrome OS Management Console][6] is the only MDM solution for Chrome OS devices. It adds a $35 cost per device and allows you to set up and configure all of the settings on a Chromebook automatically as soon as the device first connects to wi-fi. The GSuite management console also allows you to provision accounts, set settings for all of the Google Apps, and configure incoming mail and archiving.

On iOS and Mac devices, [Apple School Manager][7] allows you to remotely  "claim" devices so they are automatically provisioned to the school when first connected to wi-fi. They can also be assigned directly to students or classrooms through this application and remotely wiped. Like GSuite, this tool also allows you to create managed AppleIDs for your district. ASM does not, however, allow you to manage device settings. For that, you'll need a third-party solution such as [JAMF][8].

Windows devices are provisioned and managed through [Active Directory][9] and [Microsoft InTune][10].  Active Directory is the only one of the solutions that benefits from on-premise hardware and is the most expensive option (but by far the most powerful).

## Upcycling
Each local board of education is required to have a policy regarding disposal of old capital assets like computers. Usually, they have to be sold in a surplus sale. However, many districts are "upcycling" their old computers. [Neverware's Cloud Ready][11] product contains additional code needed to run Chrome OS on most non-Chromebook computers. This effectively allows any computer, especially older laptops and desktops, to be converted and managed as Chromebooks through the Chrome OS Management Console. [Ubermix][12] is a Linux variant that is designed to convert older devices into lightweight machines that run Firefox and Open Office (an open-source alternative to MS Office). Because the requirements of these operating systems are so light, any computer made in the last 10-15 years should be able to run them in a way that's adequate for daily use.

## Virtualization
As classes have gone online, some of the specialized apps used in classrooms (especially CTE classrooms) are unavailable. Most districts don’t have enough licenses to run Photoshop, for example, on every student device (plus most student devices are Chromebooks and cannot run Photoshop anyway). As a result, many schools are turning to virtualization solutions, similar to [NC State’s Virtual Computer Lab][13], where students can remotely use desktop software in the cloud regardless of the type of device that they have. While an Internet connection is required, schools can use this as a tool to stretch limited license or device budgets using tools such as [Citrix][14], Microsoft’s [Windows Virtual Desktop][15], and Amazon’s [AppStream][16]. 

## Device Shortages During COVID-19
The COVID-19 pandemic has resulted in many unexpected challenges. At the start of the pandemic, many districts ordered new laptops to move to a 1:1 initiative or to provide more laptops to students who needed a device at home. However, many of the orders placed in March and April of 2020 are still unfilled and may be unfilled through the end of 2020 and beyond. The [massive demand for laptops, combined with sanctions on China by the US Government][17] has created a laptop shortage. Vendors estimate they are millions of units behind in production to meet worldwide demand. As a result, many students ([especially lower-income students][18]) are being left in a lurch during remote learning. Many schools are compensating by switching to Windows laptops and iPads which are more readily available (at increased cost, so schools are typically able to purchase fewer) or repurposing old and donated devices using NeverWare’s offering.    

[1]:	https://www.google.com/chromebook/chrome-os/
[2]:	https://edu.google.com/products/gsuite-for-education/?modal_active=none
[3]:	https://www.makeuseof.com/tag/linux-everywhere-10-things-didnt-know-penguin-powered/
[4]:	https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Solid-state_drive
[5]:	https://snipeitapp.com
[6]:	https://support.google.com/chrome/a/answer/1289314?hl=en
[7]:	https://support.apple.com/guide/apple-school-manager/what-is-apple-school-manager-tes7909096bf/web
[8]:	https://www.jamf.com
[9]:	https://azure.microsoft.com/en-us/services/active-directory/?&ef_id=Cj0KCQiAyp7yBRCwARIsABfQsnQDQzJRBIHkElvv1ZP9Caffej9PgUt5A_z1lXbQlvfutNBbZGxomPwaAr8BEALw_wcB:G:s&OCID=AID2000128_SEM_MtGOcT1K&MarinID=MtGOcT1K_255432298728_%2Bactive%20%2Bdirectory_b_c__56507452761_aud-411816020131:kwd-296849318599&lnkd=Google_Azure_Brand&gclid=Cj0KCQiAyp7yBRCwARIsABfQsnQDQzJRBIHkElvv1ZP9Caffej9PgUt5A_z1lXbQlvfutNBbZGxomPwaAr8BEALw_wcB
[10]:	https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/intune/fundamentals/what-is-intune
[11]:	https://www.neverware.com/edu#cloudready-for-education-management
[12]:	https://www.ubermix.org/index.html
[13]:	https://vcl.ncsu.edu
[14]:	https://www.citrix.com
[15]:	https://azure.microsoft.com/en-us/free/services/virtual-desktop/?&ef_id=CjwKCAjw4_H6BRALEiwAvgfzq-oLWkgWrs_mRffFwD55_Ri5A0V8_ruPoO-2QKAHhzsw9yjoX7QW5hoCo1kQAvD_BwE:G:s&OCID=AID2100131_SEM_CjwKCAjw4_H6BRALEiwAvgfzq-oLWkgWrs_mRffFwD55_Ri5A0V8_ruPoO-2QKAHhzsw9yjoX7QW5hoCo1kQAvD_BwE:G:s&gclid=CjwKCAjw4_H6BRALEiwAvgfzq-oLWkgWrs_mRffFwD55_Ri5A0V8_ruPoO-2QKAHhzsw9yjoX7QW5hoCo1kQAvD_BwE
[16]:	https://aws.amazon.com/appstream2/?blog-posts-cards.sort-by=item.additionalFields.createdDate&blog-posts-cards.sort-order=desc
[17]:	https://aws.amazon.com/appstream2/?blog-posts-cards.sort-by=item.additionalFields.createdDate&blog-posts-cards.sort-order=desc
[18]:	https://www.vox.com/recode/2020/8/28/21403336/laptop-shortage-chromebook-tablet-school-reopening